## CI/CD PR testing on ALPS @ CSCS
Unit tests and Integration tests will be performed for each PR made to IPPL on ALPS at CSCS, currently, the (daint) NVidia gh200 nodes, (beverin) AMD mi300a nodes and (eiger) AMD Zen2 multicore/OpenMP nodes are being used for tests (other architectures can/will be added on request and subject to availability). Each PR that is tested will receive either a green tick (pass), or a red cross (fail). 

Clicking on the Tick/Cross will take you to the pipeline information page where you can drill down to see individual stages/steps
* what stages/steps exist (and dependencies), currently there are
  * Debug 
    * Build all tests in debug mode to ensure all compilation succeeds 
    * 1 rank run of unit tests (excluding known fails)
  * Release
    * Build all tests in release mode to ensure all compilation succeeds 
    * 1 rank run of unit tests (excluding known fails)
    * 4 ranks run of unit tests (excluding known fails)
    * 4 ranks run of unit tests (only known fails) - This step is marked as "Allowed to fail" and can be used to check if fixing a failing test has worked and if it can be removed from the known fail list.
* what the commands run and output generated at each step is/was
* which tests passed failed and what error messages appear

### Which PRs are tested
All PRs submitted to IPPL **via the IPPL github repo** (ie not via forks) will be tested automatically - this is possible since only authorized github accounts are allowed to push branches and create PRs from the IPPL repo directly. 

PRs **submitted via forks** can be tested by adding a comment of the form

Example: run multiple testing pipelines 
```
cscs-ci run cscs-ci-gh200,cscs-ci-mi300,cscs-ci-openmp
```
Example: run only the gh200 testing pipeline 
```
cscs-ci run cscs-ci-gh200
```
Example: run only the mi300 testing pipeline 
```
cscs-ci run cscs-ci-mi300
```
The usernames of people who are authorized to trigger pipeline runs is essentially the same as those who have repo access to IPPL but can be maintained via the maintenance page mentioned in the section [Information](#information-for-cicd-at-cscs). Please contact a CSCS/IPPL collaborator to have names added/removed from the authorized members list or to change which branches should be considered for testing (currently **master**)

The CI/CD pipelines will be automatically (re-)run on every push/modification of a qualifying PR. Appending new commits will trigger a new run and a new tick/cross status. 

### Unit/Integration tests
Testing is performed using `ctest` and cmake/ctest has no distinction between any tests added via `add_test` in a CMakeLists file. In IPPL a `unit test` is intended to be a small modular check of a specific feature of function that confirms whether something is working or not. An `integration test` represents a build or run of something that uses multiple modules or spans several algorithms or code blocks.  
The majority of unit test in IPPL are defined simply such as these examples
```
add_ippl_test(EdgeElement)
add_ippl_test(QuadrilateralElement)
add_ippl_test(HexahedralElement)
```
with no parameters or other qualifiers, if they complete without error, then the test passes.

An example of an integration test can be found in the alpine module. This runs a small test case of a more complex example and checks that it completes without error.
```
add_ippl_integration_test(LandauDamping 
  ARGS 16 16 16 10000000 10 FFT 0.01 LeapFrog --overallocate 2.0 --info 10
  LABELS alpine integration)
```

#### Improvements needed to Integration tests

Currently no checks are performed on the validity or correctness of the results generated by tests unless something is explicitly written to make those checks. For example, a validity check on LandauDamping would load the results created by the test and run a yes/no pass/fail test on them to see if the values are correct (or fit some known analytic function to a certain tolerance).Such a check can be added as part of the integration test, or as a separate test.

### Directory structure of CSCS CI/CD testing
Files needed by cscs CI are all placed under a directory structure where the pipelines exist in the `ci/cscs` root and each architecture/configuration has a sub directory. Editing these yaml files changes how tests are executed and they can be examined for information on how the pipelines work.
```
ippl-root
└── ci
    └── cscs
        ├── common.yml
        ├── cscs-gh200.yml
        ├── cscs-mi300.yml
        ├── cuda
        │   ├── build_sm90.yml
        │   └── run_sm90.yml
        ├── openmp
        │   ├── build_openmp.yml
        │   └── run_openmp.yml
        └── rocm
            ├── build_rocm-6.3.yml
            └── run_rocm-6.3.yml

```
**Implementation note**
Note that due to the way CSCS mirrors the github repo to a gitlab instance and then triggers gitlab runners for pipelines by invoking slurm, the build stages and test/run stages are setup slightly differently. 
When building, we use a `uenv` based runnner to provide the base libraries needed for ippl, but when testing, we use a `baremetal` runner and manually invoke srun commands with the uenv/view details as parameters. The reason for this is that `uenv` runners invoke the whole script via slurm (safe when building as we only have one build command), but when running tests, we want to execute individual tests using `srun -n <ranks> command` rather than have the runner invoke `srun -n <ranks> ctest` - for this reason we have a customized ctest invocation in the `run_xxx.yaml` files.

#### Information for CI/CD at CSCS
**CSCS webpage for documentation of CI/CD implementation**
https://docs.cscs.ch/services/cicd
Contains general info on all aspects of CI/CD using gitlab runners and github webhooks 

**CSCS Knowledge-base for CI/CD**
https://confluence.cscs.ch/spaces/KBTDS/pages/868812112/Continuous+Integration+Continuous+Deployment
This page has information on how to setup CI using containers, or UENV builds, and how to set variables that are passed to the actual build/test jobs. For example - since the gh200 and mi300 clusters are accessed via different authentication domains, we use some variables to pass firecrest authentication keys into the runners whilst keeping them secret from the main scripts in the repo. This arrangement change when mi300 nodes are more closely integrated with other CSCS clusters.

**gitlab yaml syntax**
https://docs.gitlab.com/ci/yaml/
Essential information on how the yaml files are structured and what sections mean/do.

**CSCS CI admin console** 
https://cicd-ext-mw.cscs.ch/ci/setup/ui?repo=2663791694469788 
the ID 2663791694469788 refers to the internal project number granted to the IPPL projet to submit tasks to ALPS for testing. 
On this pages, per mission can be set and pipeline properties can be changed. (Note: CSCS staff members can directly register a project by clicking on register new project at the bottom right of the CI overview page).

**github settings webhooks**
```
payload url : https://cicd-ext-mw.cscs.ch/ci/webhook_ci?id=`XXXXXXX`
payload type: application/json
Secret      : issued when new CI/CD project created
```

Note that the pipeline names can be set via the admin console, the names **cscs-ci-gh200** and **cscs-ci-mi300** were chosen to represent the architectures that they are run on, but are otherwise completely arbitrary and if changed the adjusted names must be used to trigger pipeline checks when done manually as described above.

The pipeline entry points are set on the admin page to point to
`ci/cscs/cscs-gh200.yml` and `ci/cscs/cscs-mi300.yml` if these yaml files are moved to renamed, the pipeline entry points must be edited accordingly. 

For information on how to setup authorization keys for firecrest launching of CSCS jobs, please consult the pages above.

**CSCS setup steps (for future reference)**
 * Github: In the project settings setup an application/json webhook and set the payload url (eg `https://cicd-ext-mw.cscs.ch/ci/webhook_ci?id=0123456789012`). The secret is taken from the CSCS CI admin console when you created the CI testing project
 * Github: Create a fine grained API token using your personal account, it might look like `github_pat_01234567890123456789abcdefabcdef`, it needs 
   * Read access to metadata  
   * Read/Write access to commit statuses 
 * The API token will be pasted into the CSCS CI admin console under the global config "Notification token"
 * Create an "Application" (eg named: ippl-testing or opalx-testing) in the developer.cscs.ch dev-portal console and add subscriptions to the firecrest interfaces for respective access
   * firecrest-HPC (for daint/eiger)
   * firecrest-beverin (mi300)
 * Create OAuth tokens (key/secret) in the firecrest realm and paste those into the CI admin console in the admin section under firecrest key/secret entries. Set accounts for csstaff, project accounts, user names in permissions
 * Setup pipelines like 'cscs-ci-gh200' to match the `ci/cscs/cscs-gh200.yml` yaml entrypoint
 * On github check webhoos/response to see if PRs are triggering anything
 * Check https://gitlab.com/cscs-ci/ci-testing/webhook-ci/mirrors/6151408209445194/694321096757981/ `build/pipelines` to see CI triggered activity
 * On a PR, use `cscs-ci run` or `cscs-ci run cscs-ci-gh200, ...` to trigger a pipeline
 * To retrigger master branch rebuild/test - got to main github page of project, locate red cross (or green tick) at top of project, it shows a list of failed or successful builds. Locate the pieline you want, and copy the link under "details", paste it into address bar, but remove `?iid=808&type=gitlab` and then page will show info. Click bottom right corner "login to restart jobs" and master branch CI will be triggered.

